W-19678702-Logging-Configuration-210-dm (#538)
mulesoft/docs-dataweave: modules/ROOT/pages/dataweave-logging-configuration.adoc

= DataWeave Logging Configuration
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]

The logging configuration feature provides granular control over DataWeave logging, which improves debugging and monitoring of data transformations.

Starting with DataWeave 2.10, you can configure logging to control the verbosity of log messages using standard log levels: `Debug`, `Info`, `Warn`, and `Error`. You can filter log messages by severity and scope, which makes it easier to troubleshoot and monitor your DataWeave code.

== Configuration Location

Define the logging configuration in a DataWeave language file named `log-config.dwl`. Place this file in the classpath at the root level.

> Use the `DataWeaveScriptingEngine` API to customize the name, location, and format of the configuration file by either implementing the `LoggingConfigurationSourceProvider` interface or by using the helper class `DefaultLoggingConfigurationSourceProvider`.

Reviewer: This section regarding `DataWeaveScriptingEngine` API does not apply to DataWeave in Mule Runtime, not sure what's the best way to clarify it

[source,json,linenums]
----
[
  {
    scope: "Runtime",
    level: "Warn"
  },
  {
    scope: "Module",
    module: "MyModule",
    level: "Info"
  },
  {
    scope: "Function",
    module: "MyModule",
    function: "test",
    level: "Debug"
  }
]
----

== DataWeave Logging Functions

The DataWeave Core library provides these functions for logging messages:

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols="a,a", options="header"]
|===
|Function |Description

|`logWith<T>(level: LogLevel, prefix: String, value: T): T`
|Base function that provides the most flexibility. It takes a log level, an optional prefix, and a value to log, and returns the value.

|`logDebug<T>(prefix: String = "", value: T): T`
|Logs a message with the `Debug` level.

|`logInfo<T>(prefix: String = "", value: T): T`
|Logs a message with the `Info` level.

|`logWarn<T>(prefix: String = "", value: T): T`
|Logs a message with the `Warn` level.

|`logError<T>(prefix: String = "", value: T): T`
|Logs a message with the `Error` level.

|`log<T>(prefix: String = "", value: T): T`
|Logs a message with the `Info` level (shorthand for `logInfo`).
|===

> == Best Practices

Reviewer: we should add the following note when using the feature in the Mule Runtime:

By default the Mule Runtime it's set to only show WARN and ERROR messages. To see more detailed messages, like INFO or DEBUG, you'll need to add a custom logger entry to the `log4j2.xml` configuration file located in the `$MULE_HOME/conf/` directory.

To enable DEBUG level logging for DataWeave messages, add this line inside the <Loggers> section of your log4j2.xml file:

```
<AsyncLogger name="org.mule.weave.v2.model.service.DefaultLoggingService$" level="DEBUG"/>
```

= DataWeave Logging Configuration
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]

> The logging configuration feature provides granular control over DataWeave logging, which improves debugging and monitoring of data transformations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Get granular control over DataWeave logging to better debug your data transformations and monitor them with precision.
```

> The logging configuration feature provides granular control over DataWeave logging, which improves debugging and monitoring of data transformations.

Author: ```suggestion
Get granular control over DataWeave logging to debug and monitor your data transformations with precision.
```

Starting with DataWeave 2.10, you can configure logging to control the verbosity of log messages using standard log levels: `Debug`, `Info`, `Warn`, and `Error`. You can filter log messages by severity and scope, which makes it easier to troubleshoot and monitor your DataWeave code.

== Configuration Location

Define the logging configuration in a DataWeave language file named `log-config.dwl`. Place this file in the classpath at the root level.

> Use the `DataWeaveScriptingEngine` API to customize the name, location, and format of the configuration file by either implementing the `LoggingConfigurationSourceProvider` interface or by using the helper class `DefaultLoggingConfigurationSourceProvider`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the `DataWeaveScriptingEngine` API to customize the name, location, and format of the configuration file by either implementing the `LoggingConfigurationSourceProvider` interface or by using the  `DefaultLoggingConfigurationSourceProvider` helper class.
```

[NOTE]
The `DataWeaveScriptingEngine` API is available only when running DataWeave outside of Mule runtime. If you're using Mule runtime, configure logging only with the `log-config.dwl` file and, if needed, the `log4j2.xml` configuration file.

The DataWeave code in this example retrieves the logging configuration in JSON format from a custom classpath location.

[source,java,linenums]
----
DataWeaveScriptingEngine engine = new DataWeaveScriptingEngine();
engine.withLoggingConfigurationSourceProvider(
  new DefaultLoggingConfigurationSourceProvider("classpath://org/acme/my-log-config.json")
);
----

== Configuration Structure

The `log-config.dwl` file contains an array of objects. Each object defines a logging rule with these properties:

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols="a,a,a,a", options="header"]
|===
|Property |Description |Required for Scope |Possible Values

|`scope`
|Specifies the scope of the logging rule.
|Always required

> |`Runtime` (Applies to all DataWeave executions), `Module` (Applies to all code within a specific module), `Function` (Applies to a specific function within a module)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|`Runtime` (applies to all DataWeave executions), `Module` (applies to all code within a specific module), `Function` (applies to a specific function within a module)
```

> |`Runtime` (applies to all DataWeave executions), `Module` (applies to all code within a specific module), `Function` (applies to a specific function within a module)

Author: ```suggestion
|`Runtime` (applies to all DataWeave executions), `Module` (applies to all code within a specific module), and `Function` (applies to a specific function within a module)
```

|`level`
|Specifies the log level.
|Always required

> |`Debug`, `Info`, `Warn`, `Error`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|`Debug`, `Info`, `Warn`, and `Error`
```

|`module`
|Specifies the name of the DataWeave module.

> |Optional, required for `Module` and `Function`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|Optional but required for `Module` and `Function`
```

Reviewer 2: (Globally)

|Any valid DataWeave module name

|`function`
|Specifies the name of the DataWeave function within the specified module.

> |Optional, required for `Function`

Author: ```suggestion
|Optional but required for `Function`
```

[source,json,linenums]
----
[
  {
    scope: "Runtime",
    level: "Warn"
  },
  {
    scope: "Module",
    module: "MyModule",
    level: "Info"
  },
  {
    scope: "Function",
    module: "MyModule",
    function: "test",
    level: "Debug"
  }
]
----

== DataWeave Logging Functions

The DataWeave Core library provides these functions for logging messages:

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols="a,a", options="header"]
|===
|Function |Description

|`logWith<T>(level: LogLevel, prefix: String, value: T): T`
|Base function that provides the most flexibility. It takes a log level, an optional prefix, and a value to log, and returns the value.

|`logDebug<T>(prefix: String = "", value: T): T`
|Logs a message with the `Debug` level.

|`logInfo<T>(prefix: String = "", value: T): T`
|Logs a message with the `Info` level.

|`logWarn<T>(prefix: String = "", value: T): T`
|Logs a message with the `Warn` level.

|`logError<T>(prefix: String = "", value: T): T`
|Logs a message with the `Error` level.

|`log<T>(prefix: String = "", value: T): T`
|Logs a message with the `Info` level (shorthand for `logInfo`).
|===

> == Best Practices

Reviewer 2: MuleSoft documentation always provides best practices, so the "Best Practices" title isn't appropriate. Maybe you can consider something like "DataWeave Logging Considerations", or similar?

> == Best Practices

Author: ```suggestion
== Considerations
```

|`logWarn<T>(prefix: String = "", value: T): T`
|Logs a message with the `Warn` level.

|`logError<T>(prefix: String = "", value: T): T`
|Logs a message with the `Error` level.

|`log<T>(prefix: String = "", value: T): T`
|Logs a message with the `Info` level (shorthand for `logInfo`).
|===

== Best Practices

* Place the `log-config.dwl` file in the classpath for the configuration to take effect.
* Log levels are hierarchical. `Error` is the highest level, followed by `Warn`, `Info`, and `Debug`.
* More specific rules (for example, function-level rules) override less specific ones (for example, runtime-level rules).
* Use the `prefix` parameter in log functions to add context to your log messages.
* In Mule runtime, the default logging level shows only `Warn` and `Error` messages.
+
To enable more detailed messages (`Info` or `Debug`), add a custom logger entry to your `log4j2.xml` configuration file in the `$MULE_HOME/conf/` directory.
+
To enable `Debug` logging for DataWeave messages, add a custom logger entry to your `log4j2.xml` configuration file:
+
[source,xml,linenums]
----
<AsyncLogger name="org.mule.weave.v2.model.service.DefaultLoggingService$" level="DEBUG"/>
----

> 
> This logging configuration feature provides granular control over DataWeave logging, which makes debugging and monitoring data transformations more efficient.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Deleting this as is mentioned in the intro. Not needed here.
